General Preparation

For this surgery, you will be squeezing a lot of equipment into a small place. I recommend having all of your drugs/tools/back ups laid out and available to you before surgery. Further, I would recommend shifting the microscope upward so the lens is facing away from you…it is an uncomfortable way to sit, but allows the electrical manipulator to fit during surgery. It will be tight, but take your time and get the microscope at an angle so that it will NOT bump your electrode during the procedure. 

Anesthesia 

Animals are anesthetized by isoflurane (1-3%), delivered by nosecone. Mice are positioned in a stereotax, with a feedback-regulated heating pad to maintain the body temperature at 37° C. The eyes are covered with petroleum ophthalmic sterile ointment to prevent drying. The paw pinch reflex is periodically tested, and the level of Isoflurane is adjusted to maintain a sufficiently deep level of anesthesia. Administer pain relief drugs at this point. 

Following deep anesthesia (confirmed by absence of paw pinch reflex), the surgical area (extending from above the nasal bones to the bone overlying the cerebellum) is shaved and the area scrubbed gently with hibiclens and betadine, using a sterile cotton-tipped applicator. Prior to incision, lidocaine (30 uL 10% solution) is injected beneath the scalp at the incision site. An incision is made into the skin along the midline using a sterile scalpel blade, and the skin overlying the nose and the dorsomedial skull is removed. The incision extends from the nasal bone to the bone overlying the cerebellum. Connective tissue and periosteum on the skull are cleaned away by suction and scalpel. 

Intranasal thermistor implantation 

During this part of the procedure, it is essential to keep the olfactory bulb and area directly posterior completely clear for the electrode implantation. 
 
An intranasal thermistor is implanted (procedure adopted from McAfee et al. 2016). The thermistor will be sterilized in 3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 minutes before implantation (the device cannot be autoclaved). Using a dental drill with a sterile FG ¼ drill bit, a small hole is drilled in the anterior portion of the nasal bone, centered 0.5mm lateral from the midline suture. The edges of this hole can be lightly cauterized if desired (less than ½ second) to reduce future swelling using a standard surgical cauterizer. The probe is carefully inserted into this cavity with sterile forceps; partial insertion just under the nasal bone, without breaking through the epithelium, is sufficient for a quality signal and reduces the risk of damage to the nasal epithelium.

Sterile bone wax can be applied to the probe to protect the temperature sensitive element and seal the opening (I don't always do this). The hole is then sealed with the bead fixed in place with a viscous super glue which prevents seepage into thermistor hole and epithelium. Set excess wire and connector to the side, preferably bent away from the surgical site towards the nose. 

Chronic electrode implantation 

In-house prepared tetrodes or silicon probes are used for recordings. Recording probes are fixed to a microdrive during surgical prep and this microdrive is held in place on a micromanipulator arm using a small screw. An electrical manipulator is roughly centered over the site of interest (olfactory bulb left or right) and tightened in place. Power on the manipulator before continuing surgery…as it resets, it may move out of place. I like to center the manipulator using a pencil or other straight object. Do not put the micromanipulator arm with the drive in it in the manipulator yet! 

Using stereotaxic measurements, a small hole (0.2-0.3 mm) is drilled above the region in which recordings will be performed (olfactory bulb, cortex, hippocampus, and superior colliculus).  For the seven shank silicon probes, you will need to drill three consecutive holes to create a trench in order for the entire probe to fit into the olfactory bulb. I prefer to do this from the medial anterior to lateral posterior to best avoid the sinus of doom. Once the craniotomy is complete, the dura is removed with a sterile, bent needle (gauge 32) and the exposed brain is hydrated with sterile saline buffer throughout subsequent procedures. If any part of this procedure bleeds, patiently wait until the bleeding has stopped, clearing the blood with gel foam. Finally, build up a thin wall of gel glue on the bone around the craniotomy. This will protect your tissue from any glue seepage and will allow you to more thoroughly irrigate it throughout your surgery. 

After the craniotomy has been made, place the manipulator arm with the electrodes into the electrical manipulator and orient so electrodes will fit along craniotomy. The recording electrodes are gently lowered towards the brain region of interest with an electrical manipulator, adjusting as needed. Once the electrodes are at the surface of the brain, if doing an olfactory bulb implant, lower a small amount further so electrodes are inside of neural tissue. If the shanks bend at all, pull back and ensure skull/dura are completely clear. Remember to continue irrigating the exposed brain with sterile saline buffer throughout this procedure. Once properly in place, fix electrode microdrive in place using your chosen adhesive. Ensure that you do not get glue near your craniotomy or on the moveable drive plate. I like to use gel super glue with zip kicker to prevent seepage and get it fixed in place quickly. The exposed brain area is then covered using Kwikcast. Once the drive is solidly fixed in place, carefully unscrew the small screw connected drive to manipulator arm. BEFORE REMOVING THE ARM: remove amplifier chip and connectors from arm and tape gently to an ear bar out of your way. Once the drive is free, use the manipulator to raise the arm off the drive and then remove so you have more space to work. 

Adhere a headbar between the ears and adhere the amplifier chip/electrode connectors against the headbar, leaning backward towards the body to reduce weight on the anterior part of the skull. Be very careful to avoid your electrodes during this procedure. Create a fence around electrode site and microdrive. This can be built using copper mesh and dental cement. I use a piece of lab tape rolled backwards on itself into a tube. I sterilize it in hydrogen peroxide prior to surgery and then I use sterile scissors to shape it to the mouse’s head around the implant to best protect both the electrodes and drive. Glue the entire base of the fence to the skull and build up glue on back of drive to ensure it is fixed in place. Inside the fence is then filled to the surface with a mixture of sterile bone wax and mineral oil melted in using a cauterizer and cotton swab stick. 

Upon completion, adhere thermistor pins to a convenient part of the implant where they will not press on the drive or fence and embed thermistor wire in adhesive. Dental cement or cyanoacrylate is applied to all exposed skull surface, skin margins, and then built up around implant for increased strength. Do this in thin layers to optimize strength of implant. 

Post-operative care 

Mice are allowed to recover in the surgical suite or a recovery unit.  The recovery cage is kept on a heating pad until the animal is fully awake. In some cases, animals are placed in a recovery unit overnight for additional support. For three days, the animals will be scrutinized for any signs of pain, such as reluctance to move about, decreased appetite and/or water consumption, weight loss, hunched posture, increased respiration, self-mutilation, or irritation around the surgical site. These observations (including animals' weights) will be recorded in individual animal health charts.

